README.md, before:

# QligFEP v2.0 and QresFEP v1.0

This collection of python command line functions is designed with the
aim to facilitate a robust and fast setup of FEP calculations for the
software package **Q**. These modules use python 3, python 2 is no 
longer supported, and an old version of the code using python 2
is now only available in the python2 branch.

This package includes at the moment two main modules:  
- QligFEP.py: module to generate ligand FEP calculations using a
dual topology approach, 
see Jespers et al. (https://doi.org/10.1186/s13321-019-0348-5).  

- QresFEP.py: module to generate protein FEP calculations using a
single topology approach, 
see Jespers et al. (https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jctc.9b00538). 

Future versions will include QLIE, dual topology QresFEP and several
translation tools for new forcefields (at the moment we support opls,
charmm,amber and openFF).

A few toplevel scripts are included in the scripts folder to facilitate
high throughput setup. Additionally, a tutorials folder is included
with a detailed description of the setup procedure as published in
Jespers et al. (QresFEP/QligFEP). This tutorial includes the generation
of ligand parameters using OPLS, how to prepare a protein system, and
how to run ligand and protein FEP calculations. These examples are 
based on ligand binding of CDk2 inhibitors.

# Installing QligFEP and QresFEP  

- Install a working version of Q, e.g.:  

    <https://github.com/esguerra/Q6>  

  
- Clone this repository:  

    git clone https://github.com/qusers/qligfep.git

- Create the shipped conda environment

    conda env create -f environment.yml

In settings.py:  

- Change SCHROD_DIR to the Schrodinger location, if you want to be
able to generate OPLS ligand parameters using ffld_server.  

- Change Q_DIR to the location of the q executables. This can be
particularly useful if you use setupFEP from a local machine on
a mounted directory. (In which case, the executables of the preparation
part and running part of Q are at several places).  

- You can add slurm specific parameters in the CLUSTER INPUTS section,
according to the given example.   

## Requirements  
- ffld_server  
- cgenff  
- Protein Preparation Wizard  
- Python3.10  
- Q  

contact: [Willem Jespers (PhD)](mailto:w.jespers@lacdr.leidenuniv.nl?subject=[QLigFEP]%20[QResFEP])


# Improvements: 
1. Added collect_dG.py to see dG in csv formats from 1.protein and 2.water just using one line of code.
2. README.md in tutorial is more clear and contains updated commands.
3. Changed setup.py:
   1. Now is able to copy the files from 1.ligprep to 3.setup so it is not necessary to do it manually
   2. In case there's an existing folder from previous runs (i.e. 1.protein), creates a new folder (i.e. 1.protein-2)

Commit message:

added template and update README

README.md, after:

# QligFEP v2.0 and QresFEP v1.0

This collection of python command line functions is designed with the
aim to facilitate a robust and fast setup of FEP calculations for the
software package **Q**. These modules use python 3, python 2 is no 
longer supported, and an old version of the code using python 2
is now only available in the python2 branch.

This package includes at the moment two main modules:  
- QligFEP.py: module to generate ligand FEP calculations using a
dual topology approach, 
see Jespers et al. (https://doi.org/10.1186/s13321-019-0348-5).  

- QresFEP.py: module to generate protein FEP calculations using a
single topology approach, 
see Jespers et al. (https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jctc.9b00538). 

Future versions will include QLIE, dual topology QresFEP and several
translation tools for new forcefields (at the moment we support opls,
charmm,amber and openFF).

A few toplevel scripts are included in the scripts folder to facilitate
high throughput setup. Additionally, a tutorials folder is included
with a detailed description of the setup procedure as published in
Jespers et al. (QresFEP/QligFEP). This tutorial includes the generation
of ligand parameters using OPLS, how to prepare a protein system, and
how to run ligand and protein FEP calculations. These examples are 
based on ligand binding of CDk2 inhibitors.

# Installing QligFEP and QresFEP  

- Install a working version of Q, e.g.:  

    <https://github.com/esguerra/Q6>  

  
- Clone this repository:  

    git clone https://github.com/qusers/qligfep.git

- Create the shipped conda environment

    conda env create -f environment.yml

In settings.py:  

- Change SCHROD_DIR to the Schrodinger location, if you want to be
able to generate OPLS ligand parameters using ffld_server.  

- Change Q_DIR to the location of the q executables. This can be
particularly useful if you use setupFEP from a local machine on
a mounted directory. (In which case, the executables of the preparation
part and running part of Q are at several places).  

- You can add slurm specific parameters in the CLUSTER INPUTS section,
according to the given example.   

## Requirements  
- ffld_server  
- cgenff  
- Protein Preparation Wizard  
- Python3.10  
- Q  

contact: [Willem Jespers (PhD)](mailto:w.jespers@lacdr.leidenuniv.nl?subject=[QLigFEP]%20[QResFEP])

# Improvements: 
1. Added collect_dG.py to see dG in csv formats from 1.protein and 2.water just using one line of code. To see specific usecase, see README.md in tutorial folder
2. README.md in tutorial is more clear and contains updated commands.
3. Changed setup.py:
   1. Now is able to copy the files from 1.ligprep to 3.setup so it is not necessary to do it manually.
   2. In case there's an existing folder from previous runs (i.e. 1.protein), creates a new folder (i.e. 1.protein-2)
4. QligFEP.py now generates different submit.sh files depending on cluster passed as argument. (CSB/TETRA)
5. Added a template with every script needed for each step.
